and qbe was savaged after the insurer
warned of a 2 billion
loss coming which given the year
shouldn't be that surprising to
investors
so falling confidence saw the all odds
drop 1.1
today it begs the question are we too
confident
the weekly reading from anz and roy
morgan is at a 13-month high
meaning we're more confident now than we
were before covert was a thing
the westpac monthly confidence series is
also
peaking but it more clearly shows the
effect that a virus outbreak here
and subsequent lockdowns can have so as
the health ministers are saying
it's no time for complacency but compare
our data to a country which is certainly
not
on top of the virus the united states
consumer confidence is dropping rapidly
not helped overnight by another rise in
jobless claims
indicating the u.s recovery is stalling
but the u.s market rose because we're
back in the bad news is good news
for market cycle no jobs should equal
more stimulus which will push the us
dollar down
and the aussie up it hits 76.4 usd
overnight that's a two-year high with
many saying
it's only the beginning that's finance
india's bowlers have hit back at
australia with the first test at the
adelaide oval
evenly poised on day two now the
tourists were rocked by the new bull
last night and then collapsed
dismally when play resumed but
australia's batsmen have also looked
shaky
under the lights on the big stage the
leading man was left speechless when
ajinka rouhani stumbled over his lines
with skipper virat kohli on his way the
new ball delivered australia further
success
as india went to stumps at six for 233.
[Music]
he's got him it's nice to see you move a
little bit tonight
and hopefully we can get it moving one
way or the other tomorrow
tomorrow early afternoon and get a few
more wickets
those wickets came in a procession as
india's tale offered precious little
resistance
the tourists lost 4 for 11 in just 25
deliveries
to be all out for 244.
australia's new opening combination
bounced onto the field
but was slow out of the blocks taking
almost five overs to break the duck
signs of aggression but there were soon
bad signs for australia
matthew wade trapped in front with joe
burns following in similar fashion
that was the plan the setup for manus
lavashayne worked perfectly
as well except for the dropped catch as
australia limped to the break at two for
35.
he offered another chance early in the
second session and again the indians
failed to capitalise
they finally pouched a steve smith
offering though
australia vulnerable with still a night
session to negotiate
neil cross abc news adelaide
australia's national sporting body is on
the verge of a landmark investigation
into women's health issues in elite
sport
reporter brittany klein has more alyssa
kent played years of professional
netball and is now sharing her expertise
from the sideline
so as a coach of young women i'm just
really passionate about
seeing young women perform at their best
her perspectives changed since becoming
a mother of three and women's health
issues weren't widely discussed
in the early stages of her career i
played centre so i was a running machine
and
all of a sudden i was a late bloomer and
i got hit with hormones and
i put on about 10 kilos in one year the
menstrual cycle
and your hormonal fluctuations are
absolutely part of being a female
athlete
dr rachel harris is spearheading a new
women's health initiative at the
australian institute of sport
drawing on her own experience we'll see
tactics straight away
as a competitive swimmer gold medal for
rachel harris
did we have much of it back then i don't
think we really talked about it a lot to
be honest
dr harris has spent the past few months
working with elite australian sports
women troubleshooting where the system
is lacking
the female performance and health
initiative will tackle taboo topics
like the menstrual cycle contraception
and medical conditions unique to women
i have a few athletes that have
endometriosis and pcos
and that can really affect the way that
they
recover and train we really need to
normalize all of those things
talk about it open up the communication
get people to understand that you know
you can perform really well if you
if you're on your period there are
people out there that have broken world
records and
um you know won gold medals while the
project is still in its infancy new
educational resources will be launched
early in the new year
the aim is to streamline education
between coaches and athletes
and also advocate for more research into
women's health both here
and internationally we certainly don't
want to go around and repeat all of the
studies that have ever been done in male
athletes but there's
unique parts about our the female
physiology that are really important to
learn about
brittany klein abc news sport integrity
australia has joined international
regulators
in criticizing a court's decision to
half russia's ban from competing in
global sport
the court of arbitration for sport gave
moscow a two-year ban for manipulating
data
following a long investigation into
state-sponsored doping
it means that russian athletes can only
compete in major events
as neutral competitors as they did in
the 2018 olympics
this is yet one other you know dark
outcome in a long
10 plus year effort for the russians to
corrupt sport to cover it up and to
essentially get away with it
russia will also be prohibited from
hosting world championship level events
for the next two years the former
governor general major general michael
jeffrey has died at the age of 83.
during a long military career he served
in malaya
papua new guinea borneo and vietnam
where he was awarded the military cross
he was also made commanding officer of
the special air service regiment
in 2003 he was appointed governor
general
prime minister scott morrison paid
tribute calling him
a remarkable man a brave soldier and a
passionate defender
of the causes that he believed in major
general jeffrey passed away peacefully
at home
just days after celebrating his birthday
time now for the weather with graham
creed we've got some very wet weather on
the way through the northern territory
and also western australia
flood watches and severe weather
warnings are in place particularly
around the kimberley in the western part
to the top end
a severe weather warning covers most of
the northern parts of the northern
territory
still got some showers and thunderstorms
through the eastern states for
queensland they're pretty much likely
anywhere through the state except the
south western corner
across the southeastern inland there is
quite a good potential that we will see
severe conditions developing with those
storms
it's also the likelihood of severe
thunderstorms about the northern
tableland and the northwest slopes and
plains in new south wales
the bulk of the activity will be
confined to that northeastern corner and
just some isolated showers about the
coastal fringe
for victoria for the most part the day
will be dry there is the chance of an
isolated shower south of the ranges and
they'll contract to the east as the day
progresses
for tasmania most of the showers are
going to be sitting about the central
and the eastern parts of the state these
are also expected to be relatively light
and isolated
for south australia it's a band from the
central north through to the western
areas we could see isolated thundery
showers with that
but generally dry and mostly sunny
conditions
dry mostly sunny conditions across the
southwest land division
it's just the inland regions again
looking at the potential of some showers
and storms
there is high fire dangers south of the
rainfall in the kimberley though
but across the kimberley very heavy
rainfall across most of the top end
strong
and gusty winds as well with
thunderstorms we're looking at
abnormally high tides about the
territory as well
remember you can keep up to date at
news.abc.net.eu
and on iview i'm miriam saab up next a
special look back at the sporting year
with tracy holmes and the ticket
quite serious situation that we're
worried about stay connected with the
abc listen app
get the latest local news and updates
from your region
we're going to stay with you so that
you're well informed download the abc
listen app
and stay connected anywhere anytime
a summer of entertainment awaits on abc
eye view
[Music]
carried me to these places that i never
thought imaginable
together we can create a better future
so you're saying you're clean squeaky i
decided to stand up
last night and i'll continue to stand up
we're coming to you from the great
barrier reef
which is like it's in my dna
put me in it your summertime streaming
is on abc iview
[Music]
here we go intensity action
fascinating journeys with legends of
australian sport
streaming now on eye view
all right so let's all please bring our
a game
we're actually looking at the site of
one of the greatest crimes
of humanity depending on what character
i'm doing
it makes me more brave i've always
enjoyed
people who have beliefs that they're
certain about
real sincere belief is like rocket fuel
[Music]
what the hell was
it's more than just comedy abc tv plus
starts january 1.
welcome to the ticket and our special
where we look at the impact of the
coronavirus on sport and how it's
changed our relationship with it
i'm tracy holmes 2020 will certainly be
remembered as a year of reckoning
a pandemic that took so much from so
many was certainly felt across
all aspects of life as well as sport
from the highest levels
right down to grassroots communities
covert 19 was
and continues to be a dark shadow on the
sporting landscape
but through it all the games found a way
to return played in a bubble
athletes separated from families travel
curtailed and stadiums emptied
some missed the social aspect of
community sport others were relieved
when the professional leagues returned
and another group realized they hadn't
missed it at all
shortly to our panel but first here's
the sporting year of 2020
one that won't be forgotten anytime soon
the sporting year began on a high with
the women's 2020 world cup final between
australia
and india smashing attendance records
a magical moment in australian sport
with 86
000 spectators packing the mcg
but then just eight days later the
covert pandemic was declared
and life as we knew it began grinding to
a halt
nothing was immune gate opening has been
delayed
the first big event to be called off was
the formula one grand prix in melbourne
the health authorities in concert with
the fia and formula one
and the grand prix corporation has
reached this decision then one by one
the sports around the world fell victim
to covert
tonight has been postponed the afl has
moved
to immediately suspend the 2020 toyota
afl
friendship season due to the rapid rate
of infection
that we can no longer guarantee the
safety of our players
to continue to play some refuse to let
the virus get the better of them
attempting to keep the games going it's
not something that obviously
should have gone ahead soon it became
clear that the covert shutdown would
start to cost people their livelihoods
spurring some of the wealthiest and most
famous athletes
into action football star lenal messi
announced he and his teammates would
take a 70
pay cut to save the jobs of workers at
barcelona fc
in the us times athlete of the year
lebron james
and indigenous basketballer patty mills
didn't need a court to make their
biggest play of the year
they joined the millions around the
world declaring black lives matter
so in the words of the honorable dr
martin luther king jr
we are not makers of history we are made
by history
but they were not the only sports stars
to take a stand
cricketers in england joined in so too
did footballers from every code in
australia
and the fastest man on four wheels lewis
hamilton
added his voice this is not a battle a
fight against
other races this is asking for equality
above above the board
meanwhile in belarus athletes marched
for freedom
and were imprisoned elsewhere sportsmen
and women lobbied the olympic movement
for the right
to protest at the games
tokyo pressed ahead making sure they
wouldn't be the only city in the world
that had the olympics cancelled twice
the 2020 games must go on
even if it is to be in 2021
and in the midst of it all fifa declared
its world cup
will travel down under australia
and peter velandes was dubbed saint
peter for putting a stake in the ground
and declaring
a start date against the odds making
sure
rugby league cemented its place in
sporting history
we are back underway season 2020
as the first in the world to return
so 2020 has certainly been a year
requiring flexibility and
agility how that impacts on 2021
we're yet to find out joining me on
today's panel is the ceo of the
australian olympic committee matt
carroll
head of football at the nrl graeme
annesley and
former vice captain of the matildas and
fifa exco member
moya dodd thank you all so much for
joining me
you know covert certainly gave athletes
an opportunity to do more than
play sport as we've just seen but what
have been the lessons
for sport itself what strengths and
weaknesses has covert exposed and i
might start with you matt
um look i think what is exposed is
actually quality
um the resilience of uh of the olympians
who had had to undergo the first ever
postponement of olympic games i mean
they've been fantastic um
you know certainly we've kept them
advised and kept them
up to date but their own resilience and
their strength of their character
to go on regardless and prepare you know
put their dreams on hold for 12 months
and continue to prepare and i guess also
the strength of the sport so
you know a lot of the olympic sports
don't have a lot of assets don't have a
lot of money
um but uh they've got on with the job at
uh managing their sport in difficult
times
and uh not only just with the belief
performance but also with the grassroots
as well so
um the resilience of the sports has been
something very special so
um you know sometimes adversity brings
out the best and i think we've seen
that happen uh across these last uh
almost 12 months
yeah and i think the point you make
about uh you know some of the
differences between grassroots and
elite is very important um graham as far
as the nrl was concerned
were their weaknesses exposed and
strengths revealed
i think tracy uh perhaps not weaknesses
but
uh in the case of the professional
sports uh what it exposed was that like
any other
business you need to have a degree of
an asset base behind you you need to
prepare for
unexpected circumstances i mean clearly
no one
ever envisaged that we would be
confronting anything like a worldwide
pandemic so
it's not something that's part of your
new year budgeting or planning
or creating assets to cater for a rainy
day so
i think there was some good lessons that
came out of it in terms of
the depths of the business of sport
and uh but clearly getting back on the
field was critical
uh for not only us but all the
professional credits yeah and
organizing that so quickly was quite
remarkable uh in the case of a number of
elite sports moya of course in the
middle of it all australia and new
zealand were announced as co-hosts of
the women's fifa world cup in 2023 that
must have been
a real positive injection in the middle
of what could have been a dire winter
yeah look i think it was probably the
high point of the year
for me personally um you know the
women's world cup is the biggest single
sporting event on the planet and it's
coming here
and i think you know we probably haven't
quite grasped how big it's going to be
but i think for australia uh you know
we're a country that's
really we're a big island a long way
from anywhere and that's kind of good
when there's a worldwide pandemic going
on but it also means that there are
great challenges for economic recovery
especially around uh
tourism and and international business
and engagement
and i think this uh is a huge boost to
australia and australians more broadly
as we hopefully come out of this
pandemic and are able to re-establish
ourselves as
as you know world citizens with uh with
people who can come and go
moya was it also an injection though for
women's sport and i know
the nrl had its nrlw but it's a very
short season
there was some concern that perhaps
women's sport was going to suffer
more unfairly than men's sport because
of covert
yeah and i think you know it has exposed
that there's a hierarchy in sport
i would say it's not strictly along
gender lines although that's an
important aspect of it but what it
showed was that the professional sports
which have large contracts for broadcast
and sponsorship but particularly
broadcast
were the ones who were uh sort of
looking
over into the abyss really quite quite
quickly when covert hit and everything
stopped
um a grassroots sport that's that's
self-funded and self-sustaining from the
bottom up
has less to fear from uh the stop and
the restart than one that's relying on a
constant stream of big revenue so
you know you saw no effort being spared
to get those
players back on the field they were in
bubbles there were all kinds of special
arrangements
and surprise surprise women weren't
weren't really part of that
um and you know i do think it was uh
it was very sad to see the women's afl
called off so quickly
i mean they were kind of just told to go
home uh with only a few weeks left on
this season and
and i know there were complications and
issues with making it happen but it just
felt like
uh it meant that women's sport would go
silent uh for a long period when there
was men's sport running and that
did happen broadly in the world with
some exceptions
the frown bundesliga restarted
almost the same time as the bundesliga
because they had a solidarity
arrangement
where um where that was made to happen
in germany
and in the us very interestingly the
nwsl the national women's soccer league
there
was i think one of the first sports to
return with
players in a bubble throughout august
and their uh
their viewership increased 500
their tv ratings increased 500 percent
partly i think because
you know this whole idea that empty
stadiums signal
an inferior product uh that idea
had to be shelved really throughout
covert because you had the very best
games in the world that were
without spectators so you know those
sorts of things did create opportunities
for
um you know broken habits to be reset
and attitudes to be reset in a way that
is more
i would say forward-facing more
future-facing graham what about
in the nrl and we're seeing the the
growth of the women's game but it's
still
um a very poor second cousin if you like
to the men's game
has there been any reset at head office
in in trying to
balance that gender agenda well
tracy we're in the process of a
long-term strategic plan to build our
nrw competition uh but we were very
determined this year that despite the
challenges of coda that it was going to
go ahead and it was going to go ahead as
planned not only
the nlw competition which was played uh
late in our year and you know during our
finals video
right through grand final uh but also
our state of origin uh fixture that
happened uh
immediately following our season so we
were determined that was going to
continue
uh we do have a long-term plan to
uh growing our competition expanding our
competition
uh and uh there'll be more announcements
about that in the not too distant future
but
we're very determined to speak we'll
come back to some of the complications
in the olympics in just a moment but i
do want to get to this because during
the shutdown
you couldn't have weddings funerals or
museum visits but you could have some
sport
the only thing that didn't come to a
complete halt was horse racing
with the economy going into reverse one
way governments could guarantee some
income was through gambling it's
something that i put to the reverend tim
costello
absolutely this is the untold story so
governments would rightly say we
needed to keep up public confidence
bread and circuses like the romans a
sport for us and that's why we did it in
lockdown
but it was actually about money so what
we now know is that during covert one
in 20 australians who'd never had a
sports bet account
opened one one in three australians who
had a sports bet
account opened a new one and
the codes that were allowed to function
separate to the lockdown on the rest of
us
actually we're paying huge dollars it's
called point of consumption
tax for state governments from sports
betting
so state treasuries we're seeing the
dollars rolling
uh the codes have done really well
because
uh every other bit of advertising went
down but sports betting
massively went up uh being the lifeline
for the codes so um i see a
very clear financial
motivation going on not just morale
boosting for the community in covet
yeah so the full impact of gambling
during covert may not be known for some
time but in almost all areas sport has
already been forced to look at their
model through a new prism
but has it led to any significant
changes in sport
and matt i'll bring you in here what are
the significant changes
that you've had to look at through
olympic sport or is it simply
the one year delay for tokyo well
certainly the games themselves
have become more simplified a lot of
cost has been taken out of the games
um but in terms of but you know in
venues
um in overlay uh things that you would
normally do
you know to save money uh so and i think
those simplifications
will continue to wait for a refresher
those simplifications will continue on
to paris
um so i think there's there's a cost
saving there and obviously the sports
including
the australian limit committee we've
looked at our business model um you know
it doesn't matter whether you're an afl
or an a league or an nrl competition um
everyone's finances were not were
knocked around
those the big professional codes were in
the in the millions
um the smaller sports were in the
hundreds of thousands but everyone's
revenue was knocked around a lot of the
olympic sports had to cancel
um events uh championships things that
they they generate their dollars from
community sport obviously fees uh paid
by parents uh
didn't didn't come through so all sports
have suffered a bit there so i think
we've learned to streamline things um
you know
but alex has also come some other
opportunities and because we've had with
everything online
in community programs we've actually
reached through things like our olympic
zone lease program
more school students across the country
and they would we would have done in the
traditional way of
of turning up in the flesh so to speak
so there's been some winners and loses
them with
we've certainly saved a lot of money on
travel i can assure you that which is a
good thing
because we get to spend we get to spend
that on the things that really matter
and and luckily zoom doesn't cost
anything
exactly exactly and i haven't missed any
of it either
[Laughter]
graeme talk to me about the nrl and any
ways
um you know that the prism has shifted
the way that you're looking at the
future of your sport
yeah we've had a complete recap of
our financial outlook tracy as a result
of coverage
you know we've had to cut an enormous
amount of costs out of our business
you know after 50 million dollars out of
our annual operating costs
uh we've uh have to make about 150 staff
redundant
uh so we're very a very much leaner uh
organization than we work with
but you know some of that was a good
thing some of it was required
uh you know it was it's never a bad
thing to
look at your cost base and and how much
of it is excess and
and what you can pull back now we've had
to
renegotiate a lot of our uh contractual
arrangements
uh with revenue uh we've had to
renegotiate
uh some of our obligations to some of
our stakeholders to players into clubs
uh and uh people andy through all of
this as uh has tried
as much as possible to maintain uh the
flow of funds to our stakeholders to
ensure that the game's viable into the
future
moya you've had the experience at the
most elite level of your sport of
football
but you're also a community footballer
yourself you understand
the whole range of experiences that
people have felt
what's been the biggest change to your
sport do you think or is it still to
come
i think one of the biggest things we all
felt this year was the
value of community sport i mean
you know i live in a city where we had a
relatively short lockdown but i can tell
you after six weeks of
not being able to go out to training or
play a game the first time that i got
out there with my
you know old boilers team average age 47
the first time the kids got back out
there
there was just this flood of realization
of how much we missed it and how
valuable it was in the meantime
people were out there buying push bikes
and walking their dogs and
you know life became very local for a
while so i think the
localness of sport the immediacy of it
and the value of participation
as opposed to just watching someone else
perform
really came to the front of their minds
and i think that will be
long lasting because people have
invested in these things now they've
gone and bought their push bikes and
you know they've found their local park
they've realized the value of uh
community sport
and i think you know it's elite sport um
as you say it's kind of a different
beast but it's the it's part of the same
pyramid and
there is always an updraft in the sport
in that if you are good at it
you're going to get picked first you're
going to get a spot in a team and you'll
get the chance to play more often and
play at a higher level
so that's a natural thing where you're
where you're trying to win and you're
seeking the best players
um but i think you know during code
and during lockdown it was also a moment
where i think we all reflected i
certainly reflected
on what sport does for everyone rather
than what those athletes can do for the
sport so it almost flipped the script if
you like
instead of saying what can you do for my
sport are you any good at it are you
going to be able to win me some matches
or a medal
or a cup and it we flipped the switch
and we said well what what can sport do
for you
who is going to value sport the most who
is it going to bring the most benefit to
and you know this is not an unusual way
to think about things i mean market
economics
every functioning market says that the
person who values a good or a service
the most
should finish up with it because they're
willing to pay the price to purchase it
so
this is ordinary everyday economics but
somehow in sport
we don't look at it that way you know if
you go into a school yard at lunch time
and you say
you know pick up two teams well the kid
who gets picked first
is the one who's best at the sport we
don't look out there at the population
of players and say
i'm going to pick the kid to whom this
will give the most value
i'll pick that kid first it might be a
kid who's never played before a kid
who's having a
hard time at home or a difficult time
fitting into school
and i think you know that inversion of
the sort of elite pyramid was
something that um i know i thought about
a lot more and i think the sports
community
is is more conscious of now would you
say that's the same
for you graeme did you look at a
flipping the pyramid
the inversion of how important
grassroots remains to
a professional sport like the nrl
well grassroots is our lifeblood uh
tracy in terms of our future stars come
from our grassroots program so um whilst
uh the lockdown forced us to make a lot
of changes to
our um competitions and uh what was
happening in the park
every saturday and sunday morning it was
critical that we got those back up and
running as quickly as possible as well
so
uh you know whilst we um uh we tend to
fund
top down rather than bottom up um it was
as soon as the government would allow
our games to be back on the park it was
critical because we couldn't afford to
lose that interest not only the interest
in terms of uh getting players to sign
up and register for their local team but
it's all about generating interest in
the professional game as well and
eyeballs on the game which
of course leads to uh broadcast ratings
which of course leads to revenue and
if we are able to if we are to fund the
grassroots level we have to maintain
those revenues and uh it's a it's a
change it's changed from top to bottom
and bottom to top well one of the
biggest sporting events to be impacted
by the coronavirus pandemic is
the olympic games for tokyo the 2020
games were pushed back to 2021
and covet issues still loom billions
more have been added to the budget as
contingencies are constantly
rejigged with athletes calling for
changes to the olympic charter and the
ioc
agreeing to create a human rights unit
broader changes
are afoot i caught up with olympic gold
medalist and five-time world champion
swimmer
bronty campbell i asked her what we can
expect from tokyo
i think what's really going to do is
make it even more unexpected than normal
every single olympics there's people
that come through we haven't ever seen
before
and they stand up at an olympics and
they do something amazing and then they
often stay on the world stage for quite
a long time the olympics is
all about timing it's once every four
years to get your timing rights that
you're
you're right on the day for the one
minute that your race goes for
once every four years is an incredible
feat then to add a year onto that
especially without being able to see
these people ever race it's gonna be
there's going to be names we've never
heard of there's going to be swims we've
never seen before
um the people have been around for a
long time
it's for them it's the most adaptable
that will be able to
stay on top yeah interesting and
exciting with the 2020 games now to be
celebrated in 2021
it's time to look to the future and how
different will sport look in the years
ahead because of
what we've been through matt i'll start
with you because you are heading to
tokyo
there's been all sorts of changes all
sorts of re-evaluation
inside the international olympic
movement how important do you think the
olympics will remain on the
international sporting agenda
oh look i think you know the tokyo games
is so important next year and i think
the best way to describe it it's an
opportunity to reconnect the world as we
come out of the covert pandemic
and have that great optimism that great
um uh
spirit this phony sport can bring to the
world and uh so i think that's the first
thing
and yes the the games are changing um
and the whole approach to
of the ioc to the games um you know as
bronte was saying there's going to be a
lot of new new
athletes come through unexpected results
because of the qualifications for the
games which is actually the harder part
as the uh
before the games of the remaining
athletes that have to qualify for the
games nearly half the next year
that's one of the jobs the aoc is to
assist our athletes in the sports
getting through that qualification
process which is uh
is challenging i'd have to say um but
certainly the games themselves that
you you mentioned uh in lead and zero
about uh protests and the the olympic
um ioc has asked all their national
olympic committees to discuss this with
their athletes and the aic has done that
we survey surveyed all our athletes some
months back both
the olympians from all over from all of
the past games and
including those who are trying to become
olympians at the tokyo games and
we've taken on that feedback from from
the athletes and put that through to the
ioc
they're continuing to survey so it's
sort of this change
is happening um you know it's
coincidental with with the covert
pandemic but
i think you're going to see really
different games you've got new sports
sports climbing
skateboarding surfing in the uh the
tokyo games
and then uh of course when we head off
to paris uh we'll have the sport of
breaking
um so it's look it's at newness it's
that refreshness it's
just about making the games more
relevant to fans it's also about
more relevant to um young athletes who
are pursuing other sports these days
away from the traditional sport so
i think it's a great opportunity and
i think so we're going to sit back and
really enjoy our fantastic tokyo games
next year
graham what about you and um the the
future of sport because it seems to be
community-wide doesn't it that there's a
real shift back even
from sponsors and broadcasters people
are
looking at a benefit at a communal level
absolutely tracy well you know sport
and as a former sports minister in a
government of state
you government i am completely and
totally aware of the value of sport
as part of the fabric of our community
uh you know right through some of the
darkest hours
of uh of code and any other
national disaster that we've faced in
the past uh you know going
way back through our history you know
whether the wars or anything else but
uh you know sport is is something that
allows people
to escape from uh their day-to-day
travels and
the maintenance of sport at grassroots
level so they can get involved actively
at the professional level and the elite
level
is critical because it does give people
hope i mean
some may say that's a cliche and some
may say that it's overstated but
it's just an escape it allows people to
leave their worries behind for a while
and look at something that they enjoy
and that they can
be passionate about and it doesn't uh it
doesn't get detracted from
by their concerns and their worries in
their day-to-day lives so
it's absolutely critical to our
communities
for many years going forward
moya 30 seconds what does the future of
sport look like
well i would like to think the future of
sport is going to be much more inclusive
and gender balanced and it's going to
focus on the well-being of its
participants and the community around it
the olympics is the biggest gender
balanced sporting event in the world
it's multi-sport and i think we're we're
all looking forward to getting a big
ripe
dose of that uh sometime in the new year
all right very quickly one word only
graham if covert is the word of 2020
what's the word of 2021
can i hyphenate it no cody
matt reconnect nice one
moya well-being very nice thank you all
very much for your time on the program
today
thank you for your company on the ticket
i'm tracy holmes remember full
interviews with our guests
are available on the ticket podcast
enjoy your summer
see you in 2021
[Music]
[Applause]
for many young and old 2020
will be the toughest year of our lives
the lives of people have changed forever
i looked outside and it looked like
doomsday
this was the year it happened corvid 19
can be characterized as a pandemic local
officials in wolhan did withhold
information nothing
compares with this it's a different
world this virus
shows no deference to rank or privilege
we thought we were going to go into the
problem we didn't realize we were going
to be the problem
then i see the disinfectant donald trump
wants his nation
back to work you pick the 26 000 people
who are going to die
you come in here for a couple of days
there's worse things than death
stop hoarding i can't be more blunt
about it stop it
bradley edwards was transported back to
his prison cell a convicted murderer
this will be hard and difficult news
for australians to absorb this is a
grossly disturbing set of events
the knock at the door came and there
were six state security police
does the government know why she's been
detained every single one of those
projects was eligible for funding
let me finish okay it's his agenda i
don't think it's a particularly
australian agenda of course there's a
lot of stuff that hurts
police deny using live ammunition
terror strikes a french city again
[Music]
of all the flames over the final moments
of flight to pk8303
for two minutes it was silence i didn't
know the magnitude
i didn't know that the whole nation had
already stopped
[Music]
all i ask of our brethren is that they
take their feet off
our
[Music]
say legs this is not acceptable they are
lucky that what black people are looking
for is equality and not revenge
time's up on the pervasive culture of
silence
maxwell's arrest means some justice for
survivors
can i just start before we do that while
i may be the first woman in this office
i will not be the last we did it we did
it
this is a fraud on the american public
we're seeing all over this nation
indeed across the world renewed faith in
tomorrow
it's easier to tell your kids character
matters
being a good person matters there have
been chinks of
light that have shone through even the
darkest of
to times the largest vaccination drive
in history now the world will be
watching
2020 has been a very challenging year
and i can't wait for it to finish
know the story with abc news
tonight sydney's coronavirus cluster
continues to grow with
restrictions flagged if it's not brought
under control
so everybody in greater sydney needs to
be on higher lurge if you have the
mildest of symptoms please get tested
and isolate
and other states implement restrictions
on new south wales travelers
throwing christmas plans into disarray
[Music]
the prime minister unveils a revamped
ministry
elevating the aged care portfolio to
cabinet
and australia's top order struggles in
the first
test against india
good evening and welcome to abc news i'm
mariam saab
there are fears tonight that sydney is
headed towards a melbourne style
lockdown
the number of cases associated with the
northern beaches cluster
has now gone up to 28 and authorities
say that case numbers
are likely to rise federal assistance
has been offered to help with contact
tracing
but so far authorities are unable to
track the source
and alarm is setting in among locals
panic buying is back people are stocking
up
and preparing for the worst if they do
lock it down
it will be will be devoted for the
for the kids authorities are appealing
for residents on the northern beaches to
stay at home this weekend
to slow the spread of the virus manly's
famous
corso was deserted along the beaches the
red and yellow flags have been lowered
the lifeguards sent home for their own
safety i think there's a mixture of
feelings it's like why us
and uh and they're annoyed people in the
sort of avalon
palm beach area are a bit nervous and
anxious
thousands of residents have been asked
to get tested
regardless of whether they have symptoms
or have visited affected venues
my husband waited four hours yesterday
at nonavail
hospital i waited two hours here last
night
and then gave up so far contact tracing
has not turned up the answers
authorities had hoped for
my anxiety is that we haven't found the
direct transmission route and can't be
ensured that we've blocked every
transmission line
genome testing has shown the strain has
come from the united states
health officials say it's similar to
that seen in a traveler who arrived from
the u.s
on december the 1st the spotlight has
also
turned to airline crews and even
visitors with special exemptions there
has been speculation that
uh this latest outbreak has been parked
by a celebrity brought in for a film
shoot is there any any troops that
speculation that you're aware of
look i apologize i don't have any
information on that what now has
authorities concerned is the discovery
that infected cases
visited venues 70 kilometers south in
cronulla
and 90 kilometers west in penrith
it does mean there's potential seeding
outside of avalon and outside of the
northern beaches
that sparked fears that in the lead up
to christmas sydney could be sliding
towards a melbourne style lockdown
if we get on top of this in the next two
or three days
all of us will be able to have a much
better christmas but if we don't get on
top of it in the next few days
it could mean further restrictions down
the track residents
right across sydney are being urged to
take extra precautions
or see christmas plans turned into
disarray
ursula malone abc news sydney
and ronnie heyman is outside an avalon
testing clink where there's again
been long lines uh ronnie what's it like
there tonight
that's right we're here at the avalon
recreation center pop-up testing clinic
where we've had a bit of rain in the
last couple of minutes so we did see
some people
leave but there was a massive line that
curved right around this building here
and i spoke to a number of people in the
line earlier who shared feelings of
disappointment anger frustration
and sadness over missed christmas
plans i spoke to one woman who said she
was planning on traveling to melbourne
for the christmas holidays but now two
of her sons are in isolation
so that's been thrown out the window but
we do know that these people here
the only thing that they can control is
their response to what is happening in
the northern beaches and that is to come
and get tested so that is exactly what
they're doing
thank you for that update ronnie heyman
they're reporting from avalon on
sydney's northern beaches
a number of states have updated their
coronavirus restrictions
as the new south wales outbreak at
sydney's northern beaches
has grown to 28. from 1am tomorrow
anyone entering queensland from the
cluster area
will have to spend two weeks in hotel
quarantine at their own expense
wa has announced that anyone from new
south wales entering the state as of
midnight
last night will have to self-quarantine
in a suitable premises
for 14 days south australia will keep
its border with new south wales open
but will reintroduce its cross-border
application process
for anyone traveling from interstate
from midnight
anyone trying to enter victoria from
sydney's hot spots will be required to
go into hotel quarantine
for 14 days and tasmania will keep its
borders open to travelers from new south
wales for now
as with the exception of the sydney
northern beaches council area
and several other high-risk hotspots in
kiribili
peakhurst and penrith one of the chinks
in australia's armour during the
pandemic is international air crew
more than a dozen south american crew
members have been fined
for breaching self-isolation orders in
sydney
new south wales is tightening the rules
so that pilots and cabin crew
will have to stay in guarded hotels
during their layovers
the race is on to find patient zero but
they may have already left the country
up to three thousand international crew
fly into sydney every week
some from the world's worst covert hot
spots
so far the crews have been told to
isolate in their hotels
but they're not guarded by police and
some staff
are breaking the rules it's the breach
of the guidelines that's the problem
it's not the actual guidelines
themselves it's people unfortunately
doing the wrong thing
a latam crew was busted doing just that
three weeks ago the 13 south american
crew members
were supposed to stay in their hotel
rooms at mascot
but instead they visited nearby venues
each has been fined
a thousand dollars while the breach
isn't believed to be responsible for any
local cases the premier fears it could
have been
disastrous it's about us shutting the
door on every risk factor that we can
see
and that's why from tuesday the system
will not only rely on people's
goodwill and compliance but it will
literally be police
i think this is uh an important step
it's a balanced step the health minister
has yet to confirm
what rules might change for
australian-based pilots and cabin crew
who are allowed to self-isolate at home
when they return from overseas
one of the issues that we're looking at
is
possibly requiring them to be tested
before
they go to their home it's um been a
long eight months for our cabin crew and
what they've had to put up with a
decision is expected in the coming days
james carmody abc news sydney
the prime minister has unveiled a minor
ministerial reshuffle elevating aged
care into cabinet
and giving dan tian the job of repairing
trade relations with china
scott morrison has put the emphasis on
stability in the midst of a recession
recovery
and health crisis that's not over yet
here's political reporter jane norman
high hopes of a covert-free christmas
derailed
we've dealt with this before we'll deal
with it again fresh outbreaks reminding
us all that this pandemic
isn't over in a time of great
uncertainty
stability and consistency is very much
what is needed unveiling his third
ministry scott morrison's opted for a
minimal reshuffle
triggered by the retirement of matthias
corman i won't be back
with simon birmingham already in the key
finance portfolio
dan tien steps up into trade a former
diplomat
he'll need to draw on those skills and
more to repair australia's fraught
relationship with china
fellow victorian alan tuj replaces him
in education
helping younger australians navigate
challenges in a rapidly changing world
ahead of the release of the aged care
royal commission's final report
the prime minister's elevated the
portfolio into cabinet
health minister greg hunt will take on
the extra role
richard kolbeck remains in the ministry
but with reduced responsibilities
how many residents of aged care
facilities have passed away from covert
i'll just have to look up my latest
report chair
the minister copped criticism for his
handling of aged care during the covert
crisis but his leader denies it's a
demotion
this is about more focus on aged care
not less and that's all it's about
assistant ministers jane hume and zed
saselja have been promoted
while two new faces joined the outer
ministry
andrew hastie and amanda stoker so the
team the prime minister presents to the
governor general next week will be
almost
identical to the one sworn in after
scott morrison's
miracle win last year putting a premium
on stability
save for a shock resignation or
retirement it's likely
this will be the ministry he takes to
the next election
before then he's planning on taking some
time off in january with his family
this time promising to tell us when can
i wish you all a
very very merry christmas the new year
can't come
soon enough jane norman abc news
canberra
importing liquid nicotine for vaping
could soon be illegal
unless you have a doctor's prescription
now the change is designed to force
those hooked on the drug
to do it under medical supervision amid
fears of long-term lung damage
political reporter anna henderson
explains
i was smoking between 40 and 50
cigarettes a day
i'd smoked for 18 years emergency nurse
belinda costigan is among many
australians who
ditched cigarettes in favor of vaping i
am going to be around for my children
every cigarette is doing new damage
health authorities have been waging a
decades-long war
on cigarettes in australia shock ads
plain packaging and higher taxes have
seen more people
quit smoking while some e-cigarette
liquids appear benign
others contain concerning chemicals
at a level that a very heavy vapour
could
approach a fatal level or could exceed a
fatal level
we don't have yet a long enough term
study of of vapours to
understand what's going to happen long
term to these people it's already
illegal to sell nicotine liquids in
australia the health regulator now wants
to ban
imports unless users have a doctor's
prescription
it will reduce supply of nicotine and
reduce the chances that
young australians will take up vaping
when i do write your prescription for
vaping gillian deacon is one of just 14
doctors across the country who are
registered to prescribe
nicotine liquids smoking is one of the
biggest killers in australia
my job is to do whatever i can to get
people to quit this
is what smokers are confronted with when
they buy a pack
but vapers can avoid the health warnings
and a detailed list of ingredients for
what they're inhaling
and while small operators are making
vaping products
big tobacco companies are also muscling
in
it's absolutely clear that behind the
vaping industry
is old tobacco now marketing to new
customers fueling fears of another
generation
getting hooked anna henderson abc news
canberra police are treating the double
murder of an elderly couple in brisbane
as an act of terrorism the only suspect
is dead
shot by police on the logan motorway
during a confrontation
yesterday morning the man's father
denies his son had terrorist links
but says that he needed help a somber
procession
in the midst of a shocking suburban
tragedy
zoe and maurice anthill were both in
their mid-80s and yesterday were found
murdered in their home on brisbane's
south side we are treating this matter
as a terrorism event the suspect 22 year
old ragi
abdi dash cam footage captured his final
moments thursday morning
he was fatally shot by police after
officers say he threatened them with a
knife on the logan motorway
his link to the elderly couple and
alleged motive
isn't known until we can establish a
connection then yes we would
look at it as a random abdi had
previously been the subject of a
counter-terrorism investigation
he was arrested last year at the
brisbane airport
the information that was available to us
was he was intending to
travel to somalia to to seek to join and
fight
with al shabab he wasn't charged but was
on bail for other minor offences
police say he cut off his gps tracking
device on wednesday
detectives are now trying to piece
together what happened
in the hours that followed linking the
deaths of this elderly couple to
terrorism is premature
especially in absence of any solid
evidence in public domain
police have been door knocking homes
around the neighborhood
if you have family living in that
parkinson area
it would be a good time to check in on
them and make sure that they're okay
residents in this quiet suburban street
say they feel shocked and
uneasy by what's unfolded here they've
described the ant tools as a beautiful
innocent couple and much-loved
neighbours mohamed abdi says his son was
going through an identity and mental
health crisis
but didn't have terrorist links my son
needed help
when he was there and the help
he got was to get shot police say
there's no
ongoing threat to the community lily
nothing abc news brisbane
a man who planned a new year's eve
terror attack in melbourne's federation
square
has had his jail sentence increased by
victoria's court of appeal
ali khalifa was sentenced to 10 years in
prison over the plot to fire into the
crowd with an assault rifle
in 2017. today the court of appeal ruled
that it was
manifestly inadequate and lengthened
ali's sentence
to 16 years with a 12-year non-parole
period
the court heard ali has renounced the
islamic state group
and there were positive prospects for
his rehabilitation
authorities are warning of a new scam
targeting social media users nationwide
where images and information are stolen
and used to promote
fake porn sites cyber security experts
say they're fielding
daily calls from victims earlier this
year jessica laurie was horrified to
discover
her instagram page had been cloned the
fake account promoting a website
offering explicit content for a fee i
just instantly felt sick
these are my photos and my family and my
information it had
stories on it very graphic you know
images with things
blotted out dental student stacy madden
faced a similar ordeal
a fake account using her details had
already attracted
more than 150 followers one of my major
concerns
um probably being able to
find a job after this if it was to
escalate everyone judging or
thinking that it actually is me when it
when it wasn't they followed all my
friends and all my family
this account that looked exactly like me
but with only fans had just suddenly
popped up and started following them
start here experts warn the scam is
targeting victims nationwide
one common methodology is i guess
baiting
or you know having an image there that
people want to click on
take them to a website that might be
publishers so that the criminals can
harvest their information
even when reported getting the accounts
taken down can be arduous it would be
weeks or months in between where someone
would send me it it got exhausting
because
over time i was like oh not again it's
not taken down
it's not uncommon for us to have people
say that they've actually reported abuse
over 100 times and are still waiting for
action to be taken
i think there's a question to ask the
social media companies as to how they
can better improve
when contacted by the abc an instagram
spokesperson
said the platform had a specialized team
dedicated to finding and blocking
impersonation scams
it says it works to remove accounts that
violates its rules
when found or reported to them police
are urging victims to report the scams
to local stations
the unauthorized use of somebody's
personal identification
information and image is a criminal
offence
but experts warn a frustrating 99 of
cyber crime
remains unsolved so in terms of
deterrence for the perpetrator
there's a little deterrence at the
moment ciara cassidy abc news
tropical cyclone yasser has killed at
least two people in fiji
including a three-month-old baby the
cyclone was the highest category five
when it made landfall last night
fijian authorities say that thousands of
people are still in evacuation centers
and it's estimated the damage bill will
run into hundreds of millions of dollars
six families sheltered together singing
to keep their spirits up
as the storm raged outside elsewhere
thousands gathered in evacuation centers
as cyclone yasa made landfall in fiji
never changed there was heavy rain
and the wind started to get stronger
and that's when the house started to
that's when satari wing took her four
children to a nearby evacuation center
i was afraid for my kids in terms of
safety more than 93 000 fijians
found themselves in the direct path of
the storm
i can confirm as of this morning we now
have two
fatalities a three-month-old baby and a
45-year-old man have been killed
and there are warnings the number of
deaths will likely rise
the category 5 cyclone brought winds of
up to 345 kilometers per hour
as it tore through fiji's second biggest
island vanualevu
it's now been downgraded to a category 3
cyclone as it heads towards tonga
fiji's prime minister has blamed climate
change for an
increase in storm severity in the region
he says recovery efforts are already
starting
clearing roads restoring critical
infrastructure and services
re-establishing communications with
severely affected areas
and coordinating support from our
development partners
but reaching the people most in need may
take some time
if you are impacted help is on the way
rest assured
we will reach you with relief hundreds
of buildings have been destroyed
but the full extent of the damage likely
won't be known for days
natalie whiting abc news
life in the first episode of covert 19
the chinese city of wuhan
has now largely returned to normal but
for those
living there the scars remain and for
many the road to recovery is only just
beginning
bang zhao explains
kankan has spent much of the first year
of his life getting at the outside world
through the windows of his family's
apartment he was taken to hospital with
an intestinal disease
in january just as culver 19 was
emerging
making him particularly vulnerable and
when lockdowns began a special milk
formula he needed to manage his house
disappeared from store shelves
i was very concerned every day when i
woke up i started thinking about where i
should go and how i could get
out his father turned to strangers on
social media for help
to the family's relief much needed
supplies began to arrive
anonymously we're not really sure who
provided us with the assistance but
we're certainly very grateful for it
in october with the pandemic under
control
kang khan was finally able to explore
outside for the first time since the
first weeks of his life
when he saw toys like the little train
and the shining neon lights inside
stores
he was extremely excited
others like freelance photographer xi
jiang
spent their time documenting life in
wuhan throughout the year
he says despite a rapid recovery it will
be a long time before people feel
completely
normal wuhan is recovering as we can see
but the scars of kovin 19 still remain
most people are in the same mood we can
easily
shed tears honestly for some
the stigma over the origin of cover 19
still weighs heavily
ariel lou is an international student at
deakin university
but she's been stranded in wuhan her
hometown
i think that to accuse or stigmatize
others is very bad
i hope questions like this will be left
to our experts
scientists and researchers often touted
as a coroner's
success story the fall out from what
happened in wuhan still reverberates for
those who live there
and across the world bank xiao abc news
2020 has been a tough year for all
australians
forced to adapt to the changes brought
by the coronavirus pandemic
for people living close to state borders
it's been complicated by different
rules and restrictions imposed by
different state governments
but as beck wetting reports it's not a
new problem
and it's one that many believe could be
made easier with the creation of a
cross-border commissioner
when fire ripped through 800 hectares of
this victorian forestry plantation in
nelson last summer
firefighters from sa answered the call
to help out
it's one of many plantations in
southeast australia close to
or spanning the border you tend to find
that
different states different organizations
kind of do their own thing so you need
to be flexible enough to use
each and every one so at all levels um
is there opportunity to to standardise
what we do across states
mr matheson believes that could be a job
for a cross-border commissioner
something border communities have been
calling for
for decades south australian mp troy
bell
raised it two years ago highlighting the
impacts on people
like local plumber david thai for the
past 23 years he's paid for dual
licences to work across the states
but due to the extra expense only some
of his staff
are dual licensed and a lot of those
guys that may only be
25 30 kilometers from mount gambia that
are in
victoria they have a hard time getting
guys so we have a lot of customers that
are quite desperate for trades that just
simply can't get them
cross-border issues came into extra
focus this year
as communities faced almost 50 different
covet 19 directives from the south
australian and victorian governments
that's been a massive workload for my
staff and also my office
across border commissioner would have
been able to assist
in making sure when those decisions are
being made in adelaide
that they work properly on the ground
and be able to feed back quickly when
things aren't working
it's a concept supported in victoria
which already has its own cross-border
commissioner
a counterpart on the other side of the
border they could have shared the
information that was
common of the complaints that they may
have been getting about
information or understanding what uh
the impact of some of the restrictions
would be
a stroke of the pan changes a lot of
things for communities
and i don't think that you know the
powers that be
when making those decisions understand
the impact that that has
the south australian government hasn't
expressed plans to assign
a cross-border commissioner while the
victorian government
said it's been beneficial having a
cross-border commissioner in new south
wales
the two states formalised their
commitment to board a collaboration
by signing a memorandum of understanding
in october
something victoria is open to doing with
sa beck wetham
abc news hobart city council is looking
at
options for controlling the short stay
accommodation sector
a recent report showed that hobart had
the highest levels of airbnbs
in australia and one of the highest in
the world
owners say they should be able to decide
what to do with their properties
after a mostly quiet season louise
elliott's
short stay accommodation in north hobart
has just been booked for five nights
it comes with a hefty price tag this
one's for four thousand dollars
in january which is good
ms elliott and her husband have three
properties
one of which is listed on airbnb at peak
season it fetches eight
hundred dollars a night this is one of
those properties where it used to be
tenanted and it could be again
but this is a property that we own so we
should be able to make the decisions on
how it's used
she's not happy the hobart city council
wants to examine how to cap the number
of airbnbs
motivating landlords to return to
long-term leases
and softening the acute rental crisis i
understand that some people will be
unhappy about it but i think we've got
to give the city back to the people who
actually live here
a report from the australian housing and
urban research unit
shows hobart had the highest percentage
of short stay accommodation in australia
at 12 of all private rental properties
we're very concerned by these figures
the tenants union wants the council and
state governments to intervene
obviously we would have a a concern
about local government moving away from
any position or support of
ensuring that we have a short stay
accommodation if left to their own
devices people will prefer the
short-term accommodation sector
not everyone amy barrett bought an
investment property a year ago
she considered putting it on airbnb to
make more money
but decided against it it just seemed a
shame to take what
was a rental property off the market and
a family home for people off the market
airbnb says there's never been a more
crucial time to focus on tourism growth
and the company doesn't want to see the
recovery efforts derailed
with any decision on a cap falling to
the state's planning minister
it appears unlikely for now katrio ebu
abc news
[Music]
india's bowlers have hit back and given
their side the upper hand over australia
on day two of the first test at the
adelaide oval the tourists were rocked
by the newborn last night and then
collapsed
dismally when play resumed but
australia's batsmen have also looked
shaky
under the lights on the big stage the
leading man was left speechless when
ajinkar rohani stumbled over his lines
with skipper virat kohli on his way the
new ball delivered australia further
success
as india went to stumps at six for 233
[Music]
he's got him it's nice to see you move a
little bit tonight and hopefully we can
get it
moving one way or the other tomorrow
tomorrow early afternoon
and get a few more wickets those wickets
came in a procession as india's tale
offered precious little resistance
the tourists lost four for 11 in just 25
deliveries
to be all out for 244. oh straight up in
the air
australia's new opening combination
bounced onto the field
but was slow out of the blocks taking
almost five overs to break the duck
signs of aggression but there were soon
bad signs for australia
matthew wade trapped in front with joe
burns following in similar fashion
[Applause]
the set up for marnis laveshane worked
perfectly as well
except for the dropped catch as
australia limped to the break at two for
thirty-five
he offered another chance early in the
second session and again the indians
failed to capitalise
they finally pouched a steve smith
offering though
australia's vulnerable position became
dire with travis head offering a return
catch to ravi ashwin
before the spinner lured debutant
cameron green into a false shot
coley doing the rest india well on top
with the night session
still to come neil cross abc news
adelaide the northern beaches cluster is
forcing the hand of sporting bodies once
again with the opening weekend of the
australian baseball league
impacted by the worsening situation this
morning the canberra cavalry didn't take
their flight to perth
for what was supposed to be the season
opening series
against the perth heat the cavalry
season
didn't even make it to first base
western australia reimposed restrictions
on people from new south wales entering
the state
late last night that meant that 18 of
our 24 players
that we had scheduled ready to go and
contracted and ready
were now ineligible to enter the state
of western australia
the nature of australia-wide sporting
competitions in 2020 meant the cavalry
had to be ready for anything this season
we knew going in that we were going to
need to have as much flexibility
as possible and be able to adjust on the
fly
and be able to come up with creative
solutions
so we were ready for this but that plan
got tested very quickly
the australian baseball league will
determine the final outcome of the
cancelled perth canberra series
with the cavalry hopeful they won't be
forced into a forfeit
we're hoping for what we think is a
common sense result
where all of this was out of our control
very similarly how we did the bush fires
last year
they'll split the series uh two wins for
each team
and we'll move on to what we hope is a a
normal rest of the season
the cavalry will now focus on hosting
the melbourne aces in canberra on boxing
day
while the situation is likely to impact
other national competitions too
the national basketball league is due to
begin in january the big bash league
will play games in sydney from january
and both the a-league and w league
seasons are due to start on december
27th
canberra united are scheduled to face
perth glory in their first game of the
season
in perth on december 29th brett mckay
abc news
canberra australia's national sporting
body is on the verge of a landmark
investigation into women's health issues
in elite sport
reporter brittany klein has the story
alyssa kent played years of professional
netball and is now sharing her expertise
from the sideline
so as a coach of young women i'm just
really passionate about
seeing young women perform at their best
her perspective's changed since becoming
a mother of three and women's health
issues weren't widely discussed
in the early stages of her career i
played centre so
i was a running machine and all of a
sudden i was a late bloomer and i got
hit with hormones and i put on about 10
kilos in one year
the menstrual cycle and your hormonal
fluctuations are absolutely part of
being a female athlete
dr rachel harris is spearheading a new
women's health initiative at the
australian institute of sport
drawing on her own experience the sea
tactics straight away as a competitive
swimmer
gold medal for rachel harris did we have
much of it back then i i don't think we
really talked about it
a lot to be honest dr harris has spent
the past few months working with elite
australian sports women troubleshooting
where the system is lacking
the female performance and health
initiative will tackle taboo topics
like the menstrual cycle contraception
and medical conditions
unique to women i have a few athletes
that have
endometriosis and pcos and
um that can really affect the way that
they
uh recover and train we really need to
normalize all of those things
talk about it open up the communication
get people to understand that you know
you can perform really well if you
if you're on your period there are
people out there that have broken world
records and
you know won gold medals while the
project is still in its infancy new
educational resources will be launched
early in the new year
the aim is to streamline education
between coaches and athletes
and also advocate for more research into
women's health both here
and internationally we certainly don't
want to go around and repeat all of the
studies that have ever been done in male
athletes but there's
unique parts about our the female
physiology that are really important to
learn about
brittany klein abc news it's time now
for the weather with graham creed
we've got some very wet weather on the
way through the northern territory and
also western australia
flood watches and severe weather
warnings are in place particularly
around the kimberley in the western part
to the top end
a severe weather warning covers most of
the northern parts of the northern
territory
still got some showers and thunderstorms
through the eastern states for
queensland they're pretty much likely
anywhere through the state
except the south western corner across
the southeastern inland there is quite a
good potential that we will see severe
conditions developing with those storms
it's also the likelihood of severe
thunderstorms about the northern
tableland and the north west slopes and
plains in new south
wales the bulk of the activity will be
confined to that northeastern corner and
just some isolated showers about the
coastal fringe
for victoria for the most part the day
will be dry there is the chance of an
isolated shower south of the ranges and
they'll contract to the east as the day
progresses
for tasmania most of the showers are
going to be sitting about the central
and the eastern parts of the state these
are also expected to be relatively light
and isolated
for south australia it's a band from the
central north through to the western
areas we could see isolated thundery
showers with that
but generally dry and mostly sunny
conditions
dry mostly sunny conditions across the
southwest land division
it's just the inland regions again
looking at the potential of some showers
and storms
there is high fire dangers south of the
rainfall in the kimberley though
but across the kimberley very heavy
rainfall across most of the top end
strong and gusty winds as well with
thunderstorms
we're looking at abnormally high tides
about the territory as well
graeme creed there with the weather
remember you can keep up to date at
news.abc.net.u
and on eyeview that's abc news for now
from myself and the news team thank you
for your company i'm mariam saab stay
with us coming up next
friday briefing
[Music]
[Applause]
all right
[Music]
[Applause]
hello and welcome to friday briefing i'm
patricia carvelis well
2020 has been a year that no one will
ever forget from the covet pandemic to
escalating trade tensions
and the black lives matter movement
we're going to look back on all of that
today my panel eric bagshaw from the
sydney morning herald and the age
shani wellington from nitv and
journalist and host of
the briefing podcast jan fran welcome to
all of you and
let's just get stuck into the bigger
story the travel plans of thousands of
australians have been thrown into
disarray a week before christmas
new border restrictions have been
imposed across the country as the clover
19 cluster on sydney's northern beaches
grows to 28.
i'm going to start with you jan because
i know that you is very personal for you
but this has been a huge year i lived
through the second
lock down the second wave in victoria
and now i suppose the unpredictability
of the covet 19 virus has become
crystal clear to us all the borders were
meant to be open everything was meant to
be hunky-dory and it's not the case
oh no it's not the case and it's so
distressing that it's not the case look
i don't
want to complain or make myself to be a
victim in this situation because i know
that there are so many people
many friends of mine my family members
who now have to re-book
tickets rethink plans not spend
christmas with their families
i had a sister-in-law who flew down just
a few days ago with two kids to spend
christmas with the fam
she's now booked a ticket back to
queensland tomorrow
just in case they closed the border
there's so much uncertainty at the
moment
and i think people are having a really
hard time with it because we were
looking forward to christmas
and we were doing so well in terms of
locally transmitted cases so to have
something like this happen
just days before the festive season
after so many weeks of doing really well
i think it's um it's a difficult pill to
swallow
it's a really difficult pill to swallow
well eric
um it's not only difficult for the
health ramifications and that is our
central
interest here but there are economic
ramifications we saw maifo come out this
week
you've been following all of this it's
all premised on us opening up at least
internally and that's been thrown into
disarray
well it has i mean at the moment we've
really had this
extraordinary run of luck and that's
allowed both
melbourne to come out of lockdown for
shops to reopen for businesses to get
back on their feet
and now as we've seen throughout this
year
one outbreak can really cause havoc for
those businesses
who are thinking about reinvesting
thinking about hiring
only for those plans to be shut down
again so at this stage
look i don't think it's going to have a
material impact on the federal budget
yet
but as we've seen in previous cases it
only takes
can only take a few days to go from 20
to 60 to 100 cases
and that can really start to really
smash uh
business confidence so that's something
that the government's going to have to
grapple with but it's also something
that we
knew about um it's going to be a stop
start recovery until
a coronavirus vaccine um does come to
these shores
so it's something that basically people
are going to have to manage i think for
at least the next
three to six months yeah it's become a
very much a reality look
shani one of our good news stories out
of all of this is the success we've had
keeping covert 19 out of some of our
really
vulnerable indigenous communities and
hard borders no doubt have been part of
that story uh land councils putting
their hands up
really very early on in the piece and
saying we want to keep people out
that's been something though that we
have to maintain right
absolutely it's definitely not the time
to be complacent as we've seen
here in sydney over the last 24 hours
things can change in a heartbeat but
like you mentioned this could have been
potentially catastrophic for
you know aboriginal communities our mob
our oral history
and i think pat turner said it pretty
well uh
last week or the week before i think it
was where she said you know not one
elder was lost
throughout this but you know that goes
back to
the community leaders that preemptively
shut down those communities
it's the community controlled health
organizations it's the people that took
the time to translate
all of the resourcing into first nations
language it's the mob on the ground that
listened
to the instructions and and took on all
those safety messages so
yet right now is not the time to be
complacent and things can change but
yeah
for now i'm so proud of our communities
that have really taken this on and what
could have potentially been so
catastrophic
yeah that's right i was pretty worried
about it at the start i've got to say i
thought this is
this is just so dangerous if this makes
it into any of those communities
look eric we've spent a lot of time
talking about australia's worsening
relationship with china this year
how are we ending the year uh much worse
than we started
it's probably the only way of describing
it we're ending it with 20 billion
dollars worth of
trade hits on australia's exports and uh
almost irreparable
irreparably damaged uh relationship with
china
neither side is willing to give any
ground uh neither side is talking to
each other
and you know again uh in the midst of
all that we've got businesses and
farmers
who can't sell their product to china
not to mention
the the biggest hit so far which is to
coal exports and about at least four
billion dollars worth of coal
has now been restricted from entering
china it's
hard to see how that situation changes
they've signed new deals with
russia indonesia australia is being
effectively shut out there
and we're also seeing really a much more
frank discussion and that is that both
sides are
pretty much admitting this is a pattern
of economic coercion
that australia has fundamentally upset
beijing by calling for a coronavirus
inquiry
by criticizing its human rights records
and is now being made an example of to
the rest of the world
um and i think what we'll see next year
is the australian government try
and stay the course but ever escalating
attention and potentially further
economic damage
as we kind of try and manage through
this really really volatile relationship
yeah it's a volatile relationship and
the other big volatility that we've seen
this year
well we've seen over the last four years
has obviously been donald trump
this year we saw one of the most
significant and important
uh presidential elections i think we'll
see in our lifetimes and president-elect
joe biden will be sworn in next month
this has been a key event and
coronavirus has been very linked of
course to his
lack of success this is donald trump jan
fran how do you reflect on this now as
we kind of have a bit of
room to breathe uh sort of not really
we're a mask everyone but
um you know he's he's kind of still not
conceding but this
is this has been a game changer of an
election
oh it has been a game changer of an
election you could probably argue that
the last election was also a
game-changer of an election
um how how do we how do we look back and
assess this situation when we have room
to breathe that's a good question
i don't quite think that the breathing
room is there yet um joe biden hasn't
been inaugurated
anything can happen i feel like we're in
this i don't know if you've seen the
movie alien pk this is perhaps a
an ungracious kind of um uh comparison
here but there's there's a scene in the
movie where
sigourney weaver is kind of walking
around the spaceship and the alien could
jump out at any moment
that's how i felt for the last few weeks
with donald trump who went silent for a
long time and he's now
slowly conceding the election loss in
the election defeat
and so are the people around him and i
think that that's um that's been a very
important kind of distinction as well
what do i make of it honestly i i don't
know
i'm gonna need to spend the summer just
kind of sitting with it for the minute
what i do know is that
joe biden got almost 80 million votes
the the largest number of votes for
an incoming president elect ever i think
but donald trump also got a very high
number of votes and what's really
interesting the bit that i think i'm
going to reflect on
the most i think that the republican
party needs to do the same this year
and and moving into the next four years
of course is that
the people who voted for donald trump
voted
for donald trump and there was a really
interesting poll that came out after the
election
that asked the question did you vote for
the person you voted for
because you want the person in or
because you want the other person
out and for joe biden it was a 50 50
split
half voted because they wanted him
specifically but the other half voted
because they didn't want donald trump
for donald trump it was
80 percent of voters who voted for
donald trump so they're actually going
they're voting
republican specifically for donald trump
so i think the republican party has
got a lot to grapple with in terms of
whether they are the party of trump
or whether they are the republican party
and how they move forward with that
leading into 2024.
look shawnee joe biden has spent the
past few weeks announcing his cabinet
picks and of course
uh you know the the his deputy is
the first woman of color to ever be
elected which is significant in and of
itself
what do you make of the diversity of of
his his cabinet and
his presidency i mean he might be an old
white guy but the people around him
aren't necessarily all the same
well i don't think it can be understated
the significance of having you know
kind of laharis in there i remember when
it was announced
there was kind of this buzz about it and
i think this year the representation of
women of color in
all kinds of fields you know where it
seems like we're having a bit of a
reckoning that
representation is finally having its
moment and it's on
the up obviously you know representation
that goes so far having someone on the
screen
you still need the structures and
everything around them we still need
that kind of structural
change in those policies and you know
there's only so much to put someone in
the chair or someone on the face it's
what happens after they're where the
real work comes but yeah i think this
year has definitely been a reckoning
when it comes to diversity in our you
know in our own country on our own
screens people are looking at
uh who's on the board of all the
different
organizations you know who who
represents us in the media
in uh our politics and in all kinds of
all kinds of
factions of life at the moment so i
think the representation is so
significant but
i think the real work starts after this
and we're going to see
you know what's symbolism what's
tokenism and and where the real work
comes in
look on that issue of of
you know these issues around race and
diversity becoming a huge issue
a very horrific event happened this year
that really started a very strong
movement george floyd's death at the
hands of a minneapolis police officer in
may sparked a mass global movement
against
structural racism and police brutality
shani is still staying with you
hundreds of thousands of people took to
the streets even in the middle of a
pandemic
which was incredible sort of both of
those events at the same time
overseas obviously in the us but here as
well it feels to me like
that movement now is at a bit of a
standstill but it really really took off
this year
is that movement got got more to achieve
has it got more
to do next year well i think
what uh you know black lives matter is
much more
than a moment you know like you
mentioned it's a movement and i think
it might seem like it's in a lull at the
moment but until the time comes where
we're not having aboriginal people
die at the hands of police or in custody
this issue is going to continue and
people are going to continue going to
the streets until that structural change
comes and i think just today the family
of
auntie tanya day started a civil lawsuit
against the victorian government there
are still families out there that are
fighting for justice and there are
communities out there that are still
fighting for justice for the deaths of
their loved ones as well so while
you know i think ziggy ramo the legend
himself
posted on instagram just this week i
think it was if you were posting black
tiles on your instagram
instagram feed hope to see you with the
marches for jan 26 you know so it is
going back to that symbolism the black
lives matter movement
continues every day for people in
america and in australia while people
are dying at the hands of police so
it's much bigger than just those times
when we were on the screens and it was
netflix was sharing nitv's coverage on
the day we're still kind of living this
and we're still doing it every single
day so much more than a time that was in
2020 and this
reality goes on into 2021 and beyond
absolutely
eric what was really fascinating for me
as a sort of someone who
observes these movements is that it was
able to galvanize that kind of support
in australia and internationally
at the time of a pandemic it seemed to
me like so many issues
were actually melding at the same time
black people disproportionately hurt by
this pandemic
this movement calling for systemic
change it did actually put some pressure
on our government even here for a while
but that seems to have dissipated
i think the pressure's still there uh
and as you said the kind of groundswell
of support
and the reckoning that australia had to
face with its
own record on indigenous rights
treatments
treatment of indigenous australians in
custody it is shameful
and the reality is that a government any
decent government has to confront those
facts and i think
the black lives matter movement here
really did help to propel
that momentum but there is just so much
work still to do
you know whether whether it's the uluru
statement which unfortunately
uh the i think you know is in some ways
progress on that really was
a victim of the pandemic and other
priorities across indigenous literacy
and health
those things need to be on the agenda
next year
in a really meaningful way and
particularly once a vaccine
does roll out and focus can really turn
to some of those pressing social issues
um you would expect along with things
like aged care
for them to be a pretty key priority of
the morrison government
if it's going to retain the faith of
some of those voters who see them as
core issues
yeah jan fran this movement happened
in the same year and we cannot not
notice it as we look back on a
on a year that i'm still trying to get
my head around
and that's the destruction of the duke
and gorge caves
it prompted a national conversation a
national inquiry
mining giant rio tinto of course under
enormous pressure and just
i suppose all of us realizing that
perhaps
we just don't take uh indigenous
cultural heritage very seriously in this
country
yes well i'm um i don't know if we've
just realized it i think we've known it
for quite some time
just realized it like the shareholders
who started putting pressure on their
companies
um well look i mean i think that that's
a great thing if we've just realised it
but it is something that has been
happening in this country um since day
one
it's evident in in what happened in
victoria with the um
the jabwarong trees that were bulldozed
despite the fact that the community had
come out
for uh many months if not years saying
these are sacred trees and we we need to
keep them standing
um look i think what what i feel really
buoyed by
and you know it remains to be seen how
this sort of stuff will play out
but we are talking a lot more about race
um we are talking a lot more about
australian identity we are talking a bit
more about
um our history and our treatment of
indigenous australians
and what i'm bored by is that people who
would have otherwise
not really been talking about these
issues or not really have had these
issues on the agenda
are now talking about them and look i
loathe to mention
instagram but i will i know that it can
be
a vapid kind of platform in a lot of
ways but it's also a platform that
reaches
so many people a lot of younger people
potentially who might not be as engaged
with the news or who might not be as
engaged with issues
in the traditional sense that we
understand news engagement
um that were talking about this stuff
that were dming people that were looking
for books to read or podcast to listen
to
that were asking to you know who should
they follow on social media and whose
writing should they be reading
i think this is an important first step
but a first step nonetheless it should
be a means to an
end not an end in and of itself and i'm
i'm bored by the fact that we've
started this and and you know i do feel
a certain degree of optimism
in in where it will go shani
i think yeah look optimism is what we
all need to
kind of cling to at this moment like
friends said
it does seem to be kind of this
self-awareness
that we haven't had up until this year
it kind of seems like
it's been to a point where uh you know
we are taking to the streets and
people aren't really going to accept the
the standard
of treatment of
indigenous people or indigenous rights
anymore and
you know when it comes to reconciliation
action plans the
mere fact of having one isn't going to
cut it it's what you do with that
reconciliation a
reconciliation action plan whether you
actually are
coming forward and engaging with
aboriginal communities and whether
you're not blowing up our sacred sites
in the background you know so it seems
like even though we are having these
discussions around
deaths in custody that we haven't had to
this degree before
2020 you know it's been a year of trauma
for aboriginal people but at the same
time you hope that with all of this
kind of exposure and these dialogues
that are finally going to happen that it
will lead to change and
it's kind of more prevalent that we're
not going to take no for an answer at
the moment hopefully 2021
is the time positivity um thinking that
hope will come and we'll be able to
see some real change and real structural
uh difference
eric we haven't got left much time left
but just final
reflection from you on something we keep
hearing 2020 get rid of it worst year
ever
is 2021 going to be better can you make
that guarantee here
oh boy yeah well it's uh it's a hell of
a bet to make look i
i am optimistic i think you know the
vaccine trials are showing
really positive results and there's a
number of candidates out there and we're
now actually rolling them out for
emergency use use in the us
and europe so that's extraordinary the
fact is the last vaccine took
four years to develop was the fastest a
vaccine has ever been produced in
we've done it in one that's
extraordinary uh
it's a testament to the power of human
ingenuity that to actually bound
together
and be able to produce something like
that and when that vaccine rolls out
i think the the sort of swell of
goodwill and optimism and the desire to
get out of our own country is going to
be a really fantastic thing so yes i'm
looking forward to a better 2021.
i am too thank you to the three of you
been great guests my panel
eric bagshaw shani wellington and jan
fran thanks guys
and thank you to you for watching
afternoon briefing
this year i'll be back with this show
next year
2021 which we just heard would be better
thank you to my producer jade clark who
makes this show sing every afternoon and
all of the people here in melbourne who
work on this show of course we get a lot
of support from our sydney colleagues
too
i hope you have a wonderful break you
will see me again next year
and i hope it's peaceful see you
9 8 this new year's eve the parties at
yours
stay home with the abc for the biggest
night of the year
at 8 30 join rove for
and at nine charlie pickering and zan
rowe bring you australia's biggest stars
there's only one place to be this new
year's eve that's your place with the
abc
from 8 30 on abc and iview
when you strip away the commercialism
the cultural non-inclusiveness of
christmas
what are we left with the peter dutton
action figure no
nothing with a lump of coal no is crap
okay for christmas special well it works
for carrots my candle like
no it's the all-inclusive
non-denominational pagan special
satirising conservative values against
inclusivity it's a feast of fun and this
bloke's cooking
all washed out under the shade of a
cooler bar cask
shawn mcauliffe's mad as hell pagan
holiday special sunday 8 30
abc and eye view i just can't take my
eyes i just can't take my eyes i just
can't take my eyes off
of you it's the way that i feel
when i'm looking at you doing the things
that you do
you're mad i'm mad you're mad
we're all mad good evening and welcome
to news at six
last thing i need right now is to get
involved with a married woman i've got
my reputation to think of
what do you know about what i want to
achieve let's just pretend that we live
in the real world
where else would you rather be it's jack
[Music]
jack
[Applause]
[Music]
spixon specs returns for a special
episode celebrating music of the 2010s
whether you like to shout geronimo as
you swing from the chandelier or you'd
rather shake it off and get lucky
we've got a show that'll hit you like a
wrecking ball
guests include kate miller heike vance
joy claire hooper and luke mcgregor
with team captains miff warhurst and
alan bro
see you very soon australia this fix and
specs 2010 special
sunday on abc and eye view
know the tradition cultural bird brings
the land back to life
know the reason the most important thing
to me as a gun dungeon person is
protecting country for future
generations
know the languages reporting from our
country larakir country reporting from
ghana country reporting from pinematic
from larakir country i'm on your toyota
country from
nepaluna lutrowita for abc news
know the meaning i in this country this
country is me
know the story with abc news
[Music]
hello and welcome i'm mariam saab with
the top stories on abc news
new south wales health officials are
continuing investigations into the
source of the covert 19 cluster
on sydney's northern beaches which has
now grown to 28.
the premier gladius virgilian says
people in sydney should be wearing masks
on public transport
while shopping or at places of worship
states and territories have moved to
introduce restrictions to people who
have been in sydney's northern beaches
south australia is reintroducing its
cross-border travel application process
victoria is bringing in a permit system
for all people traveling from new south
wales
and wa has warned the hard border with
new south wales
could be reinstated prime minister scott
morrison has elevated the aged care
portfolio to cabinet
as part of his third ministerial
reshuffle the changes have been prompted
by the retirement of matthias corman
whose finance portfolio has been handed
to simon birmingham
dan tien has been named trade minister
tens of thousands of people have spent
the night in shelters across
fiji this after tropical cyclone yasser
struck the country
the category 5 system had winds of up to
240 kilometers an hour when it made
landfall
the government has declared a state of
natural disaster
those are the latest stories from abc
news stay with us now for the drive
[Music]
hello and welcome to the drum i'm
catherine robinson coming up
a growing covert cluster on sydney's
northern beaches
threatens to ruin christmas celebrations
for thousands
year 12 students in new south wales get
their atar results
what now for the cohort that's worked
through fires and a pandemic
to get here and we're off to the movies
with renowned
film critic david stratton
joining me on the panel gp and city of
sydney councillor dr karen phelps great
to see you karen hi catherine
in brisbane senior reporter at the
saturday paper
rick morton lovely to have you on the
show rick thank you for having me
in melbourne lawyer and writer naidol
newan great to see you nidol
great to be back and also in melbourne
marketing strategist
toby ralph toby nice to meet you looking
forward to chatting today
yes indeed i'm looking looking forward
to it too and you can of course join us
on twitter using the hashtag thedrum
and of course on facebook well a covered
cluster on sydney's northern beaches has
ballooned to 28
cases threatening to scupper holiday
plans
for many it's expected that over the
next few days
tens of thousands of people will travel
interstate
but as the size of the cluster grows
airlines have seen a spike in demand
as people race to get flights before new
restrictions
are brought in i'd ask everybody just to
have a
proportionate response to what's
happening in new south wales if i was a
leader in another state i would
certainly
be making provisions about people who
are coming from a hot spot from the
avalon cluster in the northern beaches
but i ask people to consider the fact
that vast parts of new south wales are
completely unaffected
well despite these pleas from the new
south wales premier other state leaders
have wasted no time
in imposing new restrictions from 1am
tomorrow
people from northern beaches will have
to go into mandatory hotel quarantine
anybody from midnight tonight who is
traveling from new south wales into
victoria
will need to have a permit that permit
will mean that anybody who has been in
any of the hot spot locations the red
zone locations
will not be permitted to travel people
arriving from
new south wales must self-quarantine for
14 days
and present for a covert 19 test on day
11.
anyone who is traveling from the
northern beaches
local government area effective from
this morning will be directed into
supervised quarantine
or given the option of returning to new
south wales if you are a tasmanian
returning from
one of these high-risk areas you will be
in quarantine for 14 days well the main
concern for health experts is that they
still have no clue where this cluster
emerged from
in terms of the genome sequencing in
relation to that case again it showed an
international strain um of the us
likely us origins my anxiety
is that we haven't found the direct
transmission route and can't be
ensured that we've blocked every
transmission line
but with signs that the source is an
international traveler
attention has turned to flight crews up
until now the rule has been that they're
allowed to self-quarantine
at homes or hotels but that is set to
change
from tuesday they'll all be required to
go to one of two hotels which the police
will able to
monitor to make sure that everybody is
actually respecting the guidelines and i
want to stress
it's the breach of the guidelines that's
the problem it's not the actual
guidelines themselves it's people
unfortunately doing the wrong thing
and according to epidemiologist
professor adrian esterman
returning flight staff have been the
weakness in the system
for months there's no reason why flight
crews should be
any different or treated any differently
to how international travelers are being
treated
they are international travelers they
are coming into the country they have an
equal risk of being infected with 19.
we now have the availability of these
very very fast rapid antigen tests
that can be easily be done pre-departure
so they have the test
before they board their plane they have
the test on arrival
it only takes 15 minutes although it's
not as accurate as the pcr test is still
a double check that they're
free of coping 19 and quarantining and
testing
and flight crews all of this should be
held should be
looked after at the national level it's
crazy that each state and territory has
its own rules and regulations and
exemptions it simply is not working
dr karen phelps it seems right to start
this with you from a medical
perspective we heard from the new south
wales health minister brad hazard today
talking about
complacency he warned of completing
creeping complacency
saying it's no longer creeping it's an
avalanche
is it time with this growing cluster out
of the north of sydney in that avalon
area to mandate masks
there's no question that this new
cluster in the northern beaches is a
reality check
for everyone in new south wales and
hopefully for everyone in australia to
know
that this virus has not gone away and it
won't go away for a long time they're
only just starting to do vaccination
in the usa for example in the uk we
haven't got the vaccine here
even beginning to roll out before march
and so we have to keep on maintaining
what we call a behavioral vaccine
and that is wearing of masks washing of
hands physical distancing
and thinking about clustering in groups
as a potential risk
and so knowing that we've got this
cluster in the northern beaches knowing
that it could well have spread beyond
the northern beaches
we need to all be very careful
particularly in the sydney area now i
was
shopping in this sydney cbd yesterday
and i was wearing a mask
because i do in shops and in any crowded
places
but it was very hard to see any other
masks around i might have only seen
another
half a dozen masks in the hours that i
was in the cbd
i've seen people on the light rail for
example hardly a person wearing a mask
people are reporting that there's nobody
on buses and trains wearing masks in
their carriages and so we have to get
serious about that
i think the new south wales government
should have mandated mask wearing some
time ago
now is the time to do it before this
next wave takes off because we have to
do
everything we can while we have the
opportunity now the people in the
northern beaches are stepping up they're
getting tested and that's a good thing
yeah we saw that today there were queues
at
many of those um pop-up cover testing
areas but why do you think though
that the premier is not mandating this
because we did hear her say advise
people today if they needed to go to the
shops or use public transport
to wear masks but it's not mandated what
what's the motivation behind not
mandating
you'd have to ask the premier that
question because i think advise is just
way too weak i think we have to mandate
masks
we have to do more than just advise
because people are not doing it they're
going oh you know what there's no
community transmission there's no risk
it's okay i think now that we've had
this cluster people are going to have
a bit of a wake-up call and i would
strongly encourage
everyone particularly in the the sydney
area the greater sydney area
and and in in fact anywhere in australia
at the moment because we've had this
outbreak it can happen anywhere we've
seen that in victoria
wear a mask when you're outside uh not
not necessarily out
outside in the open air but certainly if
you're going to be somewhere that you
can't physically distance
if you're going to be on public
transport if you're going to go into
shops
if you're going to be in a crowded place
toby as a result
of this avalon cluster we've uh seen a
very swift response from the
states and territories we outlined the
different rules that are now in place at
the beginning of this segment the new
south wales premier said that she'd
hoped
for an appropriate response to what's
been happening in new south wales and
noted
that the vast majority of those in the
states remain unaffected what do you
think
the approach should be with respect to
borders has it been right
for wa to take its stance in queensland
to take it
oh look i at first i think it's terrific
that it's happened in new south wales if
anywhere
because they've got such good contact
tracing it's a grown-up government and
they treat their citizens like grown-ups
their inclination isn't automatically
authoritarian
i'm sure if it gets worse they'll
they'll stamp on it more
the i'm relieved to see the states
haven't done blanket bans
they're dealing with local government
areas rather than the whole states
which is encouraging it's a it's a
moving feast i mean
i guess the thing we learn we're all
learning is
the best way to deal on with this stuff
is to jump on it really thoroughly
really early
that's why australia's done so well
relative to the rest of the world
uh i i think that states are making
pretty appropriate decisions at the
moment
and and i'm very relieved that the
contact tracers in new south wales
you've done such a wonderful job with
the other people who are who are
managing all this it's great
rick there was something like 250 000
case new cases in the us on wednesday
even more
uh yesterday 25 000 in the uk 17 000 in
france we're talking about 28
cases here in this country is it
sustainable every time that we
get an outbreak of this size that the
that we have such changes to the borders
look i mean the border situation it is
getting better because you know
it wasn't that long ago that queensland
had a hard border um essentially for the
whole state of new south wales even when
there were
there were spots so that has been
changing um but but the
certainly in new south wales i mean toby
said it more provocatively than i might
but
new south wales does have a good contact
tracing system um i know people who work
in those teams
and they are incredibly skilled and they
are work they're working
so so hard and we have kind of proved
certainly new south wales i know i'm in
queensland at the moment but in new
south wales we have proved that there
are
we are capable of hunting down
where this virus has been quite quickly
we did it with the ruby princess
i know that was a disaster in terms of
the mechanics of how that happened but
we we tracked them down i think there
were only
11 secondary infections um from some of
those people that came off the ship
so we can do it and certainly you know
the us strategy has failed miserably i
mean
it looks like a failed state i mean they
are the worst
uh in terms of covert deaths in the
entire world you know
ahead of brazil so it's an absolute
shame what's happened over there and we
should be proud of what we've done as
a nation here toby it's interesting and
niadalla i will come to you in just a
moment because a lot of this rest and
the success of this
rel relies on trust doesn't i
interviewed a gentleman earlier this
morning
who wasn't didn't live on the northern
beaches he went there for one
meeting for an hour or two and his plans
to go and visit
his mom in queensland and his new nephew
that he's never met
and now in disarray but he's doing the
right thing he's going
and he's getting tested but can we
assume that of all other australians if
they just popped up to the beaches for
an hour or two for whatever purpose
and they want to go and see family for
christmas and they don't want to have to
pay that sort of money for quarantine
can we expect people to do the right
thing or do you think they'll tell a few
little fibs
no i think they'll still some big fits
um the evidence is already in i think
when they were doing checking on people
who should be
uh quarantining at home um
uh they found that one third of the
people were actually out
i think for example somebody's been up
to queensland
um and just arrived there for a holiday
who's now being told they should self
quarantine for two weeks
it's very unlikely to do so it's they're
not going to spend their hotel locked in
their their holiday locked in a motel um
they're going to say oh look it doesn't
apply to me i'd imagine there'd be lots
of things there
there's a one other thing which which
concerns me i think there's a
huge danger of a global
post-christmas cluster due largely to
one individual someone who'll
spread the virus thoughtlessly from
house to house
[Music]
and travel across borders all in a very
limited time frame which will create all
sorts of infection vectors
and i think you we all know who i mean
and i'm talking about you
santa yeah
everyone said the progressives wanted to
have the war on christmas but it was not
the case
naidol if we can continue with this on
this issue of trust but from the other
side the way that
the government is placing trust in
people
do you think that we've been holding
different socio-economic
groups to account differently throughout
of this
throughout all of this pandemic i mean
we see that the northern beaches of
sydney is a fairly affluent area
and they haven't been locked down
they've just been told to do the right
thing and stay at home which hasn't
necessarily been the case throughout
this pandemic this year
um i think there is more generally i
think there is always going to be
a part of dealing with this pandemic
that involve a level of trust um
on on people to do the right thing and
even if it's not
mandatory quarantine you still are
trusting that people are going to follow
the rules for example
and perhaps it's not it's not
maybe it's not a bad thing or it's not
unrealistic to rely on that because
in victoria for example people have done
the right thing and the numbers have
come down and we're now
in a situation where we can really have
almost a covet
free christmas if i can be bold enough
to say taboo
nothing happens you know so i think
because we live
in a democratic state we have to trust
the citizens because we cannot just take
you cannot just take people's all right
and liberties away
so i think part of this strategy would
always involved
um you know relying on the trust of of
the people
but i do think that how who we trust
um if we look at how whether it's a
media coverage or even government
um restrictions using the example of
victoria
sadly it's not uh it's not consistent
you know
we had two african young women who
obviously breached the laws
and did the wrong thing and nobody
support they support what they did
but their faces were splashed across
media
platforms and print and they were called
enemy of the states
we're not seeing the same kind of
coverage at the moment
going on people in the northern beaches
and in fact we didn't even see similar
coverage when
other i suppose um non-african people
black people
uh bridge the bishop the rule so and and
part of the narrative and this has just
been more of the version of the coverage
part of the narrative does indeed goes
to that question about who we can trust
because there's a presumption
at least in some of the media coverage
that i've seen that these groups
multicultural groups for example
are inherently untrustworthy because
they do not know our laws they do not
try
you know we cannot trust them to even
understand what the laws are
or to do the writing and therefore you
know they are a threat to
either the state or the the the nation's
ability to respond and contain
um kovitt 19 and i think that really
does erode trust but it's also not just
with
i think migrant or ethnic groups and
mainstream communities
i think you also see that kind of uh
this the different or disproportionate
uh consequences of
whether it's rules or whether it's
restrictions or stuff on on
on how they're impacting different
groups so for example there was research
done that
shows that the highest number of people
that were fine coffee related fine where
were people who came from
los angeles status or in fact where
indigenous and
and people of african or migrant descent
so it's really interesting to see those
disparities
it's it's also interesting to just to
unders to see how
this whole pandemic is on earth or at
least heighten inequality
in the way we respond in the way we deal
with it and and
my my kind of worry really is how it
affects
um the future as as we get out of um we
get out of
the pandemic it's definitely shown a
light on many inequities
in society but if this year has taught
us anything
it's to expect anything but just try
telling that to a year 12
student end of his school exams are
stressful enough at the best of times
but taking them in the midst of a
pandemic
is of course completely unprecedented
now
naidol we saw you congratulate a south
australian student on his results
dengarang deng is originally from south
sudan
he achieved an atar of 98.1
becoming the ducks of saint columba
college in adelaide
now naidol i know you went on to talk
about how much joy it gives you
to see kids from your home country doing
so well
but what you don't know is that our
reporter ruby cornish went to speak to
deng
and here's his story i am so excited
about this
dengarang deng sets himself a high bar
so high that an atar of 98.1
was disappointing if i started as
hard as i should have theoretically i
think it should have been a 99.95 but
it didn't turn out that way
his family is far more excited about the
results
keep learning what you are doing now
we're so proud of you for your family
and i know uh in some years come you
you'll be a greater person
and we will still be proud of you so
keep doing that you did it for the
community
you did it for your family you did it
for yourself
and also for those who might need your
help
it's a good thing yeah yeah i think i've
achieved something really really great
deng has been in australia for four
years he spent most of his life in the
kikuma refugee camp
of northwest kenya